---
tags:
  - stack
---
# 1. Introduction to Stacks
Created Wednesday 22 January 2020

Every DS has its pros and cons:

1. Variables can store and access elements, but not more than one.
2. Arrays store many variables all at once, but cannot be resized due. Vectors solve the static size problem.
3. Linked list solves the issue of no. of elements, i.e no space is wasted. Also, contiguity is not a necessity, i.e. linked lists are not affected by fragmented memory. But random-access is not possible.
4. Contiguous data structures have excellent "memory locality" and "cache performance", which is important (assuming time, space have already been optimized). Linked data structures, e.g. linked-list suffers from poor "memory locality" and poor "cache performance".
5. With large records, moving pointers is easier and faster than moving the items themselves. Linked structure have this advantage.

We can compare access, insertion and removal for all the possible cases. 

Stack is an Abstract Data Type. i.e LIFO(from the elements POV) owill be followed for any operations. Both LL and Arrays can be used here.

* As it is an ADT, the internal physical DS's arrays and LLs are not to worried about.
* Visualize as a vertical stack.
* LIFO means that entry and exit points are same. And that they change with each deletion and insertion.


**Working**
* We will block direct access by making the DS's address as private.
* Only the interface functions are available to the user


**Jargon(Stack interface)**:
1. push - insertion into the stack
2. pop - deletes an(the element at top) element and returns the value.
3. top() - Access the top most element. Returns a copy of the topmost element. No changes made in the stack.  
4. size() - returns number of elements in the stack.
5. isEmpty() - returns boolean true if stack is empty, else false.

* Recursion requires stack ADT. The elements are the activation records.


## Real world use of stacks - theory
LIFO order arises in many real-world contexts. People crammed into a subway car exit in LIFO order. Food inserted into my refrigerator usually exits the same way, despite the incentive of expiration dates. 

Algorithmically, LIFO tends to happen in the course of executing recursive algorithms.