---
tags:
  - graphs
  - mst
---
# 1. Intro to MST
Created Sunday 19 April 2020

## Intro
A spanning tree of a connected graph G = (V,E) is a subset of edges from E forming a tree connecting all vertices of V. For edge-weighted graphs, we are particularly interested in the minimum spanning tree—the spanning tree whose sum of edge weights is as small as possible.

Minimum spanning trees are the answer whenever we need to connect a set of points (representing cities, homes, junctions, or other locations) cheaply using the smallest amount of roadway, wire, or pipe. i.e., cheapest (minimum sum) connected subgraph.

## Minimum Spanning Tree
**Tree:** A connected graph with no cycles.

**Spanning Tree:** Given a simple (no loops or multi-edge) undirected connected graph, a tree containing all the vertices of the graph is called a spanning tree.

- Multiple MSTs for a given graph. At-least one does.
- An MST is a tree, so |V| - |E| = 1

**Minimum Spanning Tree:** For a weighted, connected, and undirected graph, a minimum spanning tree (MST) is a tree with the least weight. There could be multiple MSTs for the same graph.

### Remember the MST requirements for a given graph:
1. Weighted
2. Undirected
3. Connected

### Uniqueness:
If each edge has a distinct weight, then there will be only one unique minimum spanning tree.
Simple proof: For different trees, at least one edge is different.

### Invariants and Properties:
* Adding any edge to an MST creates a cycle.
* Finding MST for a given weighted, connected, and undirected graph.

### Naive Approach:
1. Find all the spanning trees.
2. Find the weight of each (i.e., sum of edges).
3. Trees with minimum values of weight are MSTs.