# 1. What are data structures and why are they important
Created Tuesday 14 January 2020

## What
> Putting the right data structure into a slow program can work the same wonders as transplanting fresh parts into a sick patient. 
> 
> &mdash; Steven Skiena

* Data structures are **ways** of storing and organizing data.

Solving a problem: When we are given some input and we work on that according to the requirement, there are many ways to store the input and to work the output. These are Data Structures and Algorithms respectively. 

* How we store our data is very important. Hence, Data structures are very important.
* Different situations require using different data structures depending on the cost of operations/requirement/availability.
* Choice of data structure is the most important thing.

e.g if user gives us some inputs, and they wants to know what they gave before. Here we will use stack. Any other data structure will not be as good as a stack here.


* **All ADTs use LL or array as the physical data structure.**

Data structure = ADT + LL/Array



## Recursive nature
This may seem trivial to point out. But a fundamental thing about simple data structures, e.g. arrays and linked lists is that they are recursive objects.

This insight leads to simpler list processing, and efficient divide-and-conquer algorithms such as quick-sort and binary search.

## Exact operations and efficiency
> Take-Home Lesson: Data structure design must balance all the different operations it supports. The fastest data structure to support both operations A and B may well not be the fastest structure to support just operation A or B.
> 
> &mdash; Steven Skiena