# 4. Coding a Graph
Created Monday 30 March 2020

* Note: Consider |V| << |E|. Vertices are less.|E| ~ |V|^2^

There are 3 types of implementations:
1. **Edge List**
We can save all the vertices in a vector. Edges are stored as 2-tuples of neighbours(vertices).

* V = {v1, v2, v3 ...}
* E = {(v1,v2), (v2, v3),...}
* This is very slow, even checking if A and B are neighbours, requires a linear search of the edge list i.e ~nC2 searches = O(n^2^) = O(E)
* Space is O(E)
* __Definitely not good.__


2. **Adjacency List** 
Store a list of vertex. Also, store a table containing vertex-{neighbours of vertex}. Neighbours are a vector of the neighboring vertices. This is very nice.

* V = {v1, v2, v3 ...}
* E = An array of neighbor lists for each vertex.
* Check A connected to B is slow, O(V)
* Space efficient - important if sparse graphs, O(E+V)
* Difficult to implement.
* Good for sparse graphs. Bad for dense graphs (better use matrix).


3. **Adjacency Matrix**
We don't need to store the vertices seperately. Both V, E are stored in the same structure.

* We'll make a square matrix(i.e 2D array) of size |V|\*|V| with each element storing true or false or number of edges(for multigraphs), corresponding to the value of isNeighbour(A,B).
* Check A connected to B is fast, O(1)
* Space **in**efficient. Same space as a complete graph. O(V<sup>2</sup>)
* Good for dense graphs, bad for sparse graphs (space wasted, better use list).
* Easy to implement.


Verdict: Adjacency matrix is faster than Adjacency list. We use it if we have no space constraint. We use a list when space is scarce. Generally matrices are used for competitions, where speed matters.

**We will be using adjacency matrix as it is the most easy to implement.**

*****

Note: The representations discussed are applicable for all types of graphs - directed, undirected, multi, self-loop etc.

